.\" Copyright (C) 2023 Breno Leitao <leitao@debian.org>
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: LGPL-2.0-or-later
.\"
.TH io_uring_prep_cmd_sock 3 "July 27, 2023" "liburing-2.5" "liburing Manual"
.SH NAME
io_uring_prep_cmd_sock \- prepare a command request for a socket
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <liburing.h>
.PP
.BI "void io_uring_prep_cmd_sock(struct io_uring_sqe *" sqe ","
.BI "                            int " cmd_op ","
.BI "                            int " fd ","
.BI "                            int " level ","
.BI "                            int " optname ","
.BI "                            void " *optval ","
.BI "                            int " optlen ");"
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
The
.BR io_uring_prep_cmd_sock (3)
function prepares an cmd request for a socket. The submission queue entry
.I sqe
is setup to use the socket file descriptor pointed to by
.I fd
to start an command operation defined by
.I cmd_op.

This is a generic function, and each command has their own individual
.I level, optname, optval
values.  The optlen defines the size pointed by
.I optval.

.SH Available commands

.TP
.B SOCKET_URING_OP_SIOCINQ
Returns the amount of queued unread data in the receive buffer.
The socket must not be in LISTEN state, otherwise an error
.B -EINVAL
is returned in the CQE
.I res
field.
The following arguments are not used for this command
.I level, optname, optval
and
.I optlen.

Negative return value means an error.

For more information about this command, please check
.BR unix(7).

Available since 6.7.

.TP
.B SOCKET_URING_OP_SIOCOUTQ
Returns the amount of unsent data in the socket send queue.
The socket must not be in LISTEN state, otherwise an error
.B -EINVAL
is returned in the CQE
.I res.
field.
The following arguments are not used for this command
.I level, optname, optval
and
.I optlen.

Negative return value means an error.

For more information about this command, please check
.BR unix(7).

.TP
.B SOCKET_URING_OP_GETSOCKOPT
Command to get options for the socket referred to by the socket file descriptor
.I fd.
The arguments are similar to the
.BR getsockopt(2)
system call.

The
.BR SOCKET_URING_OP_GETSOCKOPT
command is limited to
.BR SOL_SOCKET
.I level.

Differently from the
.BR getsockopt(2)
system call, the updated
.I optlen
value is returned in the CQE
.I res
field, on success. On failure, the CQE
.I res
contains a negative error number.

.TP
.B SOCKET_URING_OP_SETSOCKOPT
Command to set options for the socket referred to by the socket file descriptor
.I fd.
The arguments are similar to the
.BR setsockopt(2)
system call.

Available since 6.7.

.TP
.B SOCKET_URING_OP_TX_TIMESTAMP
Retrieve transmit timestamps from the socket's error queue. This provides an
alternative to the traditional
.BR recvmsg(2)
error queue interface for obtaining TX timestamps.

The command operates in a polled multishot mode: io_uring will poll the socket
and keep posting timestamps as CQEs until the request is cancelled or fails.
The ring must be created with
.B IORING_SETUP_CQE32
or
.B IORING_SETUP_CQE_MIXED
to provide space for the timestamp data.

The socket must first be configured for timestamping via
.BR setsockopt(2)
with
.B SO_TIMESTAMPING
at the
.B SOL_SOCKET
level, specifying the desired timestamp types (e.g.
.BR SOF_TIMESTAMPING_TX_SOFTWARE ,
.BR SOF_TIMESTAMPING_TX_SCHED ,
.BR SOF_TIMESTAMPING_TX_ACK )
along with
.B SOF_TIMESTAMPING_SOFTWARE
and
.BR SOF_TIMESTAMPING_OPT_TSONLY .

The following arguments are not used for this command:
.I level, optname, optval
and
.I optlen.

Each timestamp is delivered as a CQE with
.B IORING_CQE_F_MORE
set in
.I cqe->flags
to indicate more timestamps may follow. The
.I cqe->res
field contains the timestamp key
.RI ( tskey ),
which corresponds to the byte offset (for TCP) or packet count (for UDP).
The timestamp type
.RI ( SCM_TSTAMP_SCHED ,
.I SCM_TSTAMP_SND
or
.IR SCM_TSTAMP_ACK )
is stored in the upper bits of
.I cqe->flags
at offset
.BR IORING_TIMESTAMP_TYPE_SHIFT .
If the timestamp is a hardware timestamp, the
.B IORING_CQE_F_TSTAMP_HW
flag is set.

The actual timestamp value is stored in the extended CQE area as a
.B struct io_timespec
(with 64-bit
.I tv_sec
and
.I tv_nsec
fields), accessible at
.IR "(cqe + 1)" .

The final CQE will not have
.B IORING_CQE_F_MORE
set, and its
.I cqe->res
will contain 0 on success or a negative error code on failure.

Available since 6.17.

.TP
.B SOCKET_URING_OP_GETSOCKNAME
Returns the current address to which the socket is bound. The result is
stored in the buffer pointed to by
.I optval,
which should be a pointer to a
.I struct sockaddr
(or appropriate variant). The
.I optlen
argument specifies the size of the buffer. On success, the CQE
.I res
field contains the actual size of the socket address. If the buffer is too
small, the result is truncated.

This is the io_uring equivalent of
.BR getsockname (2).

Available since 6.19.

.SH NOTES
The memory block pointed by
.I optval
needs to be valid/live until the CQE returns.

.SH RETURN VALUE
Dependent on the command.

.SH ERRORS
The CQE
.I res
field will contain the result of the operation.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR io_uring_get_sqe (3),
.BR io_uring_submit (3),
.BR io_uring_register (2),
.BR unix (7)
