.\" Copyright (C) 2026 Jens Axboe <axboe@kernel.dk>
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: LGPL-2.0-or-later
.\"
.TH io_uring_prep_ofd_lock 3 "June 11, 2026" "liburing-2.15" "liburing Manual"
.SH NAME
io_uring_prep_ofd_lock \- prepare an open file description lock request
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <fcntl.h>
.B #include <liburing.h>
.PP
.BI "void io_uring_prep_ofd_lock(struct io_uring_sqe *" sqe ","
.BI "                            int " fd ","
.BI "                            int " type ","
.BI "                            __u64 " start ","
.BI "                            __u64 " len ","
.BI "                            unsigned int " lock_flags ");"
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
The
.BR io_uring_prep_ofd_lock (3)
function prepares a byte range lock request with open file description
semantics, the equivalent of the
.BR fcntl (2)
.B F_OFD_SETLKW
command. The submission queue entry
.I sqe
is setup to apply or remove an advisory record lock on the file referenced
by the file descriptor
.IR fd ,
covering the byte range starting at offset
.I start
and spanning
.I len
bytes, where a
.I len
of
.B 0
means "until the end of the file, however large it may grow". The
.I type
argument is one of:
.TP
.B F_RDLCK
Place a read (shared) lock.
.TP
.B F_WRLCK
Place a write (exclusive) lock.
.TP
.B F_UNLCK
Remove an existing lock from the given range.
.PP
The
.I lock_flags
argument may have the following flag set:
.TP
.B IORING_OFD_LOCK_NOWAIT
Fail with
.B -EAGAIN
rather than wait, if a conflicting lock is held. This is the equivalent of
.B F_OFD_SETLK
behavior.
.PP
Unlike
.BR fcntl (2)
with
.BR F_OFD_SETLKW ,
a request for a contended lock does not block the submitter. The request
simply remains pending, without tying up a thread, until the lock has been
acquired. A pending request can be aborted with
.BR io_uring_prep_cancel (3),
in which case it completes with
.B -ECANCELED
without acquiring the lock. Pending requests are also cancelled if the ring
is torn down.
.PP
The locks taken follow regular open file description lock semantics, see the
description of
.B F_OFD_SETLK
in
.BR fcntl (2):
the lock is owned by the open file description referenced by
.IR fd ,
not by the process. Locks taken through duplicated file descriptors have
the same owner, hence they never conflict, with overlapping ranges of the
same owner being merged or converted. They do conflict with locks owned by
other open file descriptions, including process-associated
.RB ( F_SETLK )
style locks. Locks are released by
.B F_UNLCK
or once every file descriptor referring to the open file description has
been closed.
.PP
Unlike
.BR fcntl (2),
ranges are always absolute (the equivalent of
.BR SEEK_SET ),
and negative lengths are not supported.
.PP
As with
.BR F_OFD_SETLKW ,
lock acquisitions are not subject to deadlock detection, a request will
never fail with
.BR -EDEADLK .
A request that can never be satisfied remains pending until cancelled.
.PP
Only locks managed by the generic VFS locking code are supported. If the
file resides on a file system that implements its own locking, such as NFS,
the request fails with
.BR -EOPNOTSUPP .
.PP
Available since kernel 7.3.

.SH RETURN VALUE
None
.SH ERRORS
The CQE
.I res
field will contain the result of the operation. Note that where synchronous
system calls will return
.B -1
on failure and set
.I errno
to the actual error value, io_uring never uses
.IR errno .
Instead it returns the negated
.I errno
directly in the CQE
.I res
field. Notable errors include:
.TP
.B -EAGAIN
.B IORING_OFD_LOCK_NOWAIT
was set and a conflicting lock is held.
.TP
.B -EBADF
.I fd
is not a valid file descriptor, or
.B F_RDLCK
was requested on a file descriptor not open for reading, or
.B F_WRLCK
on one not open for writing.
.TP
.B -ECANCELED
The request was cancelled before the lock was acquired.
.TP
.B -EINVAL
.I type
or
.I lock_flags
are not valid, or
.I start
exceeds the maximum file offset.
.TP
.B -ENOLCK
The kernel ran out of memory for allocating lock records.
.TP
.B -EOPNOTSUPP
The file has a file system specific lock implementation, which is not
supported.
.TP
.B -EOVERFLOW
.I start
plus
.I len
exceeds the maximum file offset.
.SH NOTES
io_uring does not support passing in a timeout for the request. Instead,
applications are encouraged to use a linked timeout to abort the lock
request at a given time, if desired.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR io_uring_get_sqe (3),
.BR io_uring_submit (3),
.BR io_uring_prep_flock (3),
.BR io_uring_prep_cancel (3),
.BR io_uring_prep_link_timeout (3),
.BR fcntl (2)
