.\" Copyright (C) 2021 Stefan Roesch <shr@fb.com>
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: LGPL-2.0-or-later
.\"
.TH io_uring_submit_and_wait_timeout 3 "November 15, 2021" "liburing-2.1" "liburing Manual"
.SH NAME
io_uring_submit_and_wait_timeout \- submit requests to the submission queue and
wait for the completion with timeout
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <liburing.h>
.PP
.BI "int io_uring_submit_and_wait_timeout(struct io_uring *" ring ","
.BI "                                     struct io_uring_cqe **" cqe_ptr ","
.BI "                                     unsigned " wait_nr ","
.BI "                                     struct __kernel_timespec *" ts ","
.BI "                                     sigset_t *" sigmask ");"
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
The
.BR io_uring_submit_and_wait_timeout (3)
function submits the next events to the submission queue belonging to the
.I ring
and waits for
.I wait_nr
completion events or until the timeout
.I ts
expires. The completion events are stored in the
.I cqe_ptr
array. The
.I sigmask
specifies the set of signals to block. The prevailing signal mask is restored
before returning.

After the caller retrieves a submission queue entry (SQE) with
.BR io_uring_get_sqe (3)
and prepares the SQE, it can be submitted with
.BR io_uring_submit_and_wait_timeout (3) .

Unlike the other submit functions, this does not return the number of submitted entries.
The actual number submitted can be less than the total number of ready SQEs if there
was an error submitting an SQE. It is not an error to submit less than the total number of SQEs.

.SH RETURN VALUE
On success
.BR io_uring_submit_and_wait_timeout (3)
returns 0 and the cqe_ptr param is filled in. On failure it returns
.BR -errno .
The most common failure case is not receiving a completion within the specified
timeout,
.B -ETIME
is returned in this case.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR io_uring_get_sqe (3),
.BR io_uring_submit (3),
.BR io_uring_submit_and_wait (3),
.BR io_uring_wait_cqe (3)
