.\" Copyright (C) 2026 Harshal Chavan <harshal24.chavan@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: LGPL-2.0-or-later
.\"
.TH io_uring_clone_files 3 "June 24, 2026" "liburing-2.12" "liburing Manual"
.SH NAME
io_uring_clone_files \- Clones registered files between rings
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <liburing.h>
.PP
.BI "int io_uring_clone_files(struct io_uring *" dst ","
.BI "                         struct io_uring * " src ");"
.PP
.BI "int __io_uring_clone_files(struct io_uring *" dst ","
.BI "                           struct io_uring * " src ","
.BI "                           unsigned int " flags ");"
.PP
.BI "int io_uring_clone_files_offset(struct io_uring *" dst ","
.BI "                                struct io_uring * " src ","
.BI "                                unsigned int " dst_off ","
.BI "                                unsigned int " src_off ","
.BI "                                unsigned int " nr ","
.BI "                                unsigned int " flags ");"
.PP
.BI "int __io_uring_clone_files_offset(struct io_uring *" dst ","
.BI "                                  struct io_uring * " src ","
.BI "                                  unsigned int " dst_off ","
.BI "                                  unsigned int " src_off ","
.BI "                                  unsigned int " nr ","
.BI "                                  unsigned int " flags ");"
.PP
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
The
.BR io_uring_clone_files (3)
function clones registered file descriptors from the ring indicated by
.IR src
to the ring indicated by
.IR dst .
Upon successful completion of this operation,
.IR src
and
.IR dst
will have the same set of registered files.

The
.IR dst
ring must not have any files currently registered. If files are currently
registered on the destination ring, they must be unregistered with
.BR io_uring_unregister_files (3)
first or pass the IORING_REGISTER_DST_REPLACE flag to replace the old files in 
.IR dst
ring.


Not yet available in the kernel.

The
.BR io_uring_clone_files_offset (3)
function also clones files from the
.IR src
ring to the
.IR dst
ring, however it supports cloning only a subset of the files, where
.BR io_uring_clone_files (3)
always clones all of them.
.IR dst_off
indicates at what offset cloning should start in the destination,
.IR src_off
indicates at what offset cloning should start in the source, and
.IR nr
indicates how many files to clone at the given offset. If both
.IR dst_off ,
.IR src_off ,
and
.IR nr
are given as
.B 0 ,
then
.BR io_uring_clone_files_offset (3)
performs the same action as
.BR io_uring_clone_files (3) .

.IR flags
may be set to the following values:
.TP
.B IORING_REGISTER_SRC_REGISTERED
If the source ring is registered AND the calling thread is the one that
originally registered its ring fd, then this flag may be set to lookup the
registered index rather than use the normal file descriptor. If the normal
file descriptor wasn't closed after registering it, there's no need to set
this flag.
.TP
.B IORING_REGISTER_DST_REPLACE
If set, cloning may happen for a destination ring that already has a file
table assigned. In that case, existing nodes that overlap with the specified
range will be released and replaced.
.PP

.SH NOTES
A ring cannot safely clone its file table into itself. Attempting to use the
same ring for both
.IR src
and
.IR dst
will fail.
.SH RETURN VALUE
On success
.BR io_uring_clone_files (3)
and
.BR io_uring_clone_files_offset (3)
return 0.
On failure, they return
.BR -errno ,
specifically
.TP
.B -EBUSY
The destination ring already has files registered, and
.B IORING_REGISTER_DST_REPLACE
wasn't set.
.TP
.B -EINVAL
An attempt was made to clone a ring into itself, or an invalid flag/offset was specified.
.TP
.B -ENOMEM
The kernel ran out of memory.
.TP
.B -ENXIO
The source ring doesn't have any files registered.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR io_uring_register (2),
.BR io_uring_unregister_files (3),
.BR io_uring_register_files (3)
