.\" Copyright (C) 2023 Jens Axboe <axboe@kernel.dk>
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: LGPL-2.0-or-later
.\"
.TH io_uring_prep_fixed_fd_install 3 "December 8, 2023" "liburing-2.6" "liburing Manual"
.SH NAME
io_uring_prep_fixed_fd_install \- prepare fixed file fd installation request
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <liburing.h>
.PP
.BI "void io_uring_prep_fixed_fd_install(struct io_uring_sqe *" sqe ","
.BI "                                    int " fd ","
.BI "                                    unsigned int " file_flags ","
.BI "                                    unsigned int " flags ");"
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
The
.BR io_uring_prep_fixed_fd_install (3)
helper prepares a fixed file descriptor installation. The submission queue entry
.I sqe
is setup to install the direct/fixed file descriptor
.I fd
with the specified
.I file_flags
file installation flags, and the
.I flags
request specific flags into the normal process file table.

One use case of direct/fixed file descriptors is to turn a regular file
descriptor into a direct one, reducing the overhead of any request that
needs to access this file. This helper provides a way to go the other way,
turning a direct descriptor into a regular file descriptor that can then
subsequently be used by regular system calls that take a normal file descriptor.
This can be handy if no regular file descriptor exists for this direct
descriptor. Either because it was instantiated directly as a fixed descriptor,
or because the regular file was closed with
.BR close (2)
after being turned into a direct descriptor.

Upon successful return of this request, both a normal and fixed file descriptor
exists for the same file. Either one of them may be used to access the file.
Either one of them may be closed without affecting the other one.

.I file_flags
may be either zero, or set to
.B O_CLOEXEC
to indicate that the new regular file descriptor should be closed during
exec. Setting this field to anything but those two values will result in
the request being failed with
.B -EINVAL
in the CQE
.I res
field.

.I flags
is as-of yet unused and must be set to zero.

.SH RETURN VALUE
None
.SH ERRORS
The CQE
.I res
field will contain the result of the operation, which in this case will be the
value of the new regular file descriptor. In case of failure, a negative value
is returned.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR io_uring_get_sqe (3),
.BR io_uring_submit (3),
.BR io_uring_register_files (3),
.BR io_uring_unregister_files (3),
.BR io_uring_prep_close_direct (3),
.BR io_uring_prep_openat_direct (3)
