.\" Copyright (C) 2026 Jens Axboe <axboe@kernel.dk>
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: LGPL-2.0-or-later
.\"
.TH io_uring_prep_flock 3 "June 11, 2026" "liburing-2.15" "liburing Manual"
.SH NAME
io_uring_prep_flock \- prepare a flock request
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <sys/file.h>
.B #include <liburing.h>
.PP
.BI "void io_uring_prep_flock(struct io_uring_sqe *" sqe ","
.BI "                         int " fd ","
.BI "                         int " flock_op ");"
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
The
.BR io_uring_prep_flock (3)
function prepares a
.BR flock (2)
equivalent request. The submission queue entry
.I sqe
is setup to apply or remove an advisory lock on the file referenced by
the file descriptor
.IR fd ,
with
.I flock_op
being one of:
.TP
.B LOCK_SH
Place a shared lock.
.TP
.B LOCK_EX
Place an exclusive lock.
.TP
.B LOCK_UN
Remove an existing lock.
.PP
.B LOCK_SH
and
.B LOCK_EX
may be OR'ed with
.B LOCK_NB
to fail with
.B -EAGAIN
rather than wait, if a conflicting lock is held.
.PP
Unlike
.BR flock (2),
a request for a contended lock does not block the submitter. The request
simply remains pending, without tying up a thread, until the lock has been
acquired. A pending request can be aborted with
.BR io_uring_prep_cancel (3),
in which case it completes with
.B -ECANCELED
without acquiring the lock. Pending requests are also cancelled if the ring
is torn down.
.PP
The locks taken are regular
.BR flock (2)
locks and follow the exact same semantics: they conflict (or not) with locks
placed through the syscall by the same rules, the lock is owned by the open
file description referenced by
.I fd
(hence duplicated file descriptors refer to the same lock, and a separate
.BR open (2)
of the same file does not), and the lock is released on
.B LOCK_UN
or once every file descriptor referring to the open file description has
been closed.
.PP
Only locks managed by the generic VFS locking code are supported. If the
file resides on a file system that implements its own flock handling, such
as NFS, the request fails with
.BR -EOPNOTSUPP .
.PP
Available since kernel 7.3.

.SH RETURN VALUE
None
.SH ERRORS
The CQE
.I res
field will contain the result of the operation. Note that where synchronous
system calls will return
.B -1
on failure and set
.I errno
to the actual error value, io_uring never uses
.IR errno .
Instead it returns the negated
.I errno
directly in the CQE
.I res
field. Notable errors include:
.TP
.B -EAGAIN
.B LOCK_NB
was set and a conflicting lock is held.
.TP
.B -EBADF
.I fd
is not a valid file descriptor, or a lock was requested on a file descriptor
not opened for reading or writing.
.TP
.B -ECANCELED
The request was cancelled before the lock was acquired.
.TP
.B -EINVAL
.I flock_op
is not valid, or stray submission queue entry fields were set.
.TP
.B -ENOLCK
The kernel ran out of memory for allocating lock records.
.TP
.B -EOPNOTSUPP
The file has a file system specific flock implementation, which is not
supported.
.SH NOTES
io_uring does not support passing in a timeout for the request. Instead,
applications are encouraged to use a linked timeout to abort the lock
request at a given time, if desired.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR io_uring_get_sqe (3),
.BR io_uring_submit (3),
.BR io_uring_prep_ofd_lock (3),
.BR io_uring_prep_cancel (3),
.BR io_uring_prep_link_timeout (3),
.BR flock (2)
