.\" Copyright (C) 2021 Stefan Roesch <shr@fb.com>
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: LGPL-2.0-or-later
.\"
.TH io_uring_prep_readv2 3 "November 15, 2021" "liburing-2.1" "liburing Manual"
.SH NAME
.fi
io_uring_prep_readv2 - prepare vector I/O read request with flags

.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BR "#include <liburing.h>"
.PP
.BI "void io_uring_prep_readv2(struct io_uring_sqe *sqe,"
.BI "                          int fd,"
.BI "                          const struct iovec *iovecs,"
.BI "                          unsigned nr_vecs,"
.BI "                          __u64 offset,"
.BI "                          int flags)"
.fi
.PP
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
The io_uring_prep_readv2() prepares a vectored IO read request. The submission
queue entry
.I sqe
is setup to use the file descriptor
.I fd
to start reading
.I nr_vecs
into the
.I iovecs
array at the specified
.I offset.
The behavior of the function can be controlled with the
.I flags
parameter.

Supported values for
.I flags
are:
.TP
.B RWF_HIPRI
High priority request, poll if possible
.TP
.B RWF_DSYNC
per-IO O_DSYNC
.TP
.B RWF_SYNC
per-IO O_SYNC
.TP
.B RWF_NOWAIT
per-IO, return
.B -EAGAIN
if operation would block
.TP
.B RWF_APPEND
per-IO O_APPEND

.P
On files that support seeking, if the offset is set to
.B -1,
the read operation commences at the file offset, and the file offset is
incremented by the number of bytes read. See
.BR read (2)
for more details. Note that for an async API, reading and updating the
current file offset may result in unpredictable behavior, unless access
to the file is serialized. It is not encouraged to use this feature, if it's
possible to provide the desired IO offset from the application or library.

On files that are not capable of seeking, the offset is ignored.

After the write has been prepared, it can be submitted with one of the submit
functions.

.SH RETURN VALUE
None
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR io_uring_get_sqe (3), io_uring_prep_read (3), io_uring_prep_readv (3), io_uring_submit (3)
